@ Notes on how assembly works.

How to compile assembly is GCC:
First the Assembler is called, with -o output flag, followed by the name of the output object file, followed by the name of the source file.
as -o output.o input.s

Then Linker is called to combine object files and resolve references to machine code locations in the final excutable. For instance, the Linker identifies and sets the start of the program with respect to the <_start:> label:
ld -o executable output.o

Lastly we can run the executable:
./executable

***In the case of linking branching source files:
as -o part1.o part1.s
as -o part2.o part2.s
ld -o allparts part1.o part2.o 
./allparts


Notes on ARM, RISC, and its relationship to CISC:
ARM is a RISC (Reduced instruction set Computing) processor and therefore has a simplified instruction set (100 instructions or less) and more general purpose registers than CISC. Unlike Intel, ARM uses instructions that operate only on registers and uses a Load/Store memory model for memory access, which means that only Load/Store instructions can access memory. This means that incrementing a 32-bit value at a particular memory address on ARM would require three types of instructions (load, increment and store) to first load the value at a particular address into a register, increment it within the register, and store it back to the memory from the register.

The reduced instruction set has its advantages and disadvantages. One of the advantages is that instructions can be executed more quickly, potentially allowing for greater speed (RISC systems shorten execution time by reducing the clock cycles per instruction). The downside is that less instructions means a greater emphasis on the efficient writing of software with the limited instructions that are available. Also important to note is that ARM has two modes, ARM mode and Thumb mode. Thumb instructions can be either 2 or 4 bytes.


Endian, Little Endian, Big Endian:
There are two basic ways of viewing bytes in memory: Little-Endian (LE) or Big-Endian (BE). The difference is the byte-order in which each byte of an object is stored in memory. On little-endian machines like Intel x86, the least-significant-byte is stored at the lowest address (the address closest to zero). On big-endian machines the most-significant-byte is stored at the lowest address. The ARM architecture was little-endian before version 3, since then it is bi-endian, which means that it features a setting which allows for switchable endianness. On ARMv6 for example, instructions are fixed little-endian and data accesses can be either little-endian or big-endian as controlled by bit 9, the E bit, of the Program Status Register (CPSR).


Notes on the Registers:
There are 16 accessible registers for us to use.
R0-R12: can be used during common operations to store temporary values, pointers (locations to memory), etc. R0, for example, can be referred as accumulator during the arithmetic operations or for storing the result of a previously called function. R7 becomes useful while working with syscalls as it stores the syscall number and R11 helps us to keep track of boundaries on the stack serving as the frame pointer (will be covered later). Moreover, the function calling convention on ARM specifies that the first four arguments of a function are stored in the registers r0-r3.

R13: SP (Stack Pointer). The Stack Pointer points to the top of the stack. The stack is an area of memory used for function-specific storage, which is reclaimed when the function returns. The stack pointer is therefore used for allocating space on the stack, by subtracting the value (in bytes) we want to allocate from the stack pointer. In other words, if we want to allocate a 32 bit value, we subtract 4 from the stack pointer.

R14: LR (Link Register). When a function call is made, the Link Register gets updated with a memory address referencing the next instruction where the function was initiated from. Doing this allows the program return to the “parent” function that initiated the “child” function call after the “child” function is finished.

R15: PC (Program Counter). The Program Counter is automatically incremented by the size of the instruction executed. This size is always 4 bytes in ARM state and 2 bytes in THUMB mode. When a branch instruction is being executed, the PC holds the destination address. During execution, PC stores the address of the current instruction plus 8 (two ARM instructions) in ARM state, and the current instruction plus 4 (two Thumb instructions) in Thumb(v1) state. This is different from x86 where PC always points to the next instruction to be executed.




Referece:
https://azeria-labs.com/arm-data-types-and-registers-part-2/
